+++
draft = true
date = 2025-06-29T16:45:23+02:00
title = "In the Limit, Only Culture Remains"
slug = "in-the-limit-only-culture"
tags = []
math=false
+++

This essay is about this post of mine from X dot com the everything app:

{{< x user="thelokasiffers" id="1855651780685603268" >}}

Let me build my thesis step by step, in case the 240-character limit of X dot
com made it unclear:

1. First, I make a simplifying definition: "Science" is the process of
   describing reality, where describing means finding models that reliably
   explain and predict physical phenomena.
2. Further simplifying, I assume that the set of models to describe reality is
   finite, so that at some stage it is possible to completely describe reality,
   i.e. to "solve" science, at least in the limit.
3. If this is true, then any science-faring civilization will ultimately reach
   "science-completeness", the state described in the previous point. This is
   assuming
   1. Eventual progress in the long run (i.e. no
      [great-filter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Filter)-like events,
      recovery from dark ages, etc.).
   2. Sufficient if not infinite time for doing so -- we are working in terms of
      limits.
4. If this is true, then this means that any two science-complete civilizations
   will converge to the same set of models (perhaps expressed differently, but
   ultimately equivalent). In the absence of multiple civilizations, the point
   can be expressed as: In terms of science, the end state is identical for any
   science-faring civilization that fits the assumptions above.
5. Scientific knowledge is thus necessarily **universal, non-rival, and
   non-excludable**. The same fact "belongs" to reality, not to its first
   discoverer. There is a human _story_ for how Maxwell's equations were
   established, but the physics they describe is not exclusive to humans, it is
   the same for everyone. Who discovered it first is arbitrary, the universe
   does not care about copyright and ownership.
6. What remains distinctive for a species, then, is everything **not fixed by
   those universal models**—the stories, aesthetics, value-hierarchies, rituals
   unique to a civilization. Call that remainder **culture = civilisation mod
   science**. In the limit, it is the only domain where contributions are truly
   non-redundant and therefore the deepest expression of what it means to be
   _this_ civilisation—indeed, to be human.

## Objection Gauntlet

If you're happy with just agreeing with what I've said so far, you can skip to
the next section. If you have some objections, I'll try to pre-empt some of them
here.

(todo: objection gauntlet)

## The remainder of science-completeness

Once scientific knowledge is complete, any civilization will share the same
fundamental understanding of reality. The distinctiveness of any civilization,
therefore, must lie beyond that universally fixed knowledge—specifically in its
**culture**.

Culture, as I define it here, includes those aspects of civilization that arise
from subjective experience, shared values, and historical narratives rather than
objective descriptions of reality. It is almost everything else that we do that
isn't merely a natural consequence of physical laws. Think of:

- **Artistic Expression:** Art, design, music, literature, architecture—all
  human creations expressing subjective preferences and aesthetic values.
- **Narrative and Identity:** History, mythology, religion,
  traditions—storytelling forms that bind communities and define collective
  identities.
- **Social Constructs:** Politics, law, morality—systems fundamentally built on
  subjective interpretations of justice, fairness, authority, and community
  values.

While this definition might still feel broad, the key distinction is
straightforward: **culture is what science alone cannot predict**. Cultural
outputs are inherently subjective, context-dependent, and reflective of
arbitrary choices of its creators rather than universal truth.

This clarification allows us to precisely restate our thesis: in the long-term
future of scientific completeness, culture alone remains unique to any given
civilization.

## We can't afford to exclusively culture-max yet

If I value meaning and I ascribe meaning to identity, and my identity is defined
by my cultural outputs, then I should just culture-max my life right? In fact,
we should _all_ just be making art and going to museums and writing novels and
cooking food in a never ending fantastic celebration of humanity, right? And
this as a call to abandon science, an anti-STEM manifesto undermining the value
of scientific endeavors, right?

THIS IS NOT WHAT THIS ESSAY IS SAYING!

As great as that sounds, there is a reason I have specifically framed the thesis
as "in the limit" -- we are simply not there yet. Curiosity aside, there is a
very pragmatic reason why we do science today: we are in a situation of
"technical debt" with respect to our understanding of reality. There are
essentially many many holes in our physical models such that we still not able
to address much of the problems the blight our existence today. Health, energy,
climate, food security, population, scarcity -- these are all problems waiting
for technical solutions we do not yet have.

Until we have bridged that gap, we cannot afford to exclusively culture-max --
we would not survive doing so. Note briefly that this does not mean that the
opposite is true either -- if we exclusively hill-climbed science we would be
left with no culture to identify us[^1]. That feels like a cop-out, but I'm just
observing what I notice here in case others have not, I am not trying to
prescribe something new.

[^1]:
    Interestingly, this tension I think explains some of the dynamics I see
    between more STEM-oriented and more culture/humanities-oriented people
    today. The STEMcels assume an air of superiority, fueled by the almost-fact
    that they are actually "contributing" to the world, supposedly addressing
    that technical debt. While this is in part true, I think there is component
    of cope here, jealous of possibly more soulful lives their less productive
    counterparts lead. On the flipside, the humanormies assume an air of je m'en
    fiche, facing the fact that they are working on borrowed time to cope with
    the associated guilt. I'm not making this up, I've seen and experienced this
    first hand in conversations with many people from both camps. Of course it's
    not always like this and the most mature (not necessarily older!) do not
    fall into these traps, but it is surprisingly common.

    PS: I think this is also explains in part why people in the arts are
    generally seen as "cooler": not only are they naughtily ignoring the
    technical debt (there's an element to transgression to that) but they are
    genuinely producing things truly unique to them and to us as a civilization,
    as a species.

## What comes after science completeness

The idea behind this essay came to me while listening to music and trying to
rationalize why I valued that experience. It was in a period of my life where I
was also trying to understand why identity felt so important, so you can see how
the thesis emerged. I generally try to rationalize things, or so I am told,
though I am not sure I had a good reason to write this: it's underdeveloped,
makes strong generalizations and assumptions and yet it's probably still
valuable to lean towards putting it out there anyway. Here's some implications
that came to mind while developing this idea and writing this essay.

First, I think taking this view provides at least a partial answer to the
questions of _"What will we do when our labour will finally be automated away?
How will we find meaning after work?"_ I always found those questions kind of
odd, because there are so many ways to get meaning out of life outside of work,
and they feel like they're coming from a lack of introspection. Do you not get
meaning from your relationships? From stories you're told and the stories you
tell? Do you never feel something when you consume art? Have you tried making
some yourself? I think we will just switch to just doing all of that all of the
time, to culture-maxxing, and maybe meaning will emerge in ensuring the valence
and quality of our cultural outputs is high, whatever that will mean. This may
come across as hedonistic, but I challenge the Calvinistic devil sitting on your
shoulder to consider that you can enjoy things and they can still not be devoid
of value, and that meaning does not need to come from sacrifice.

An interesting consequence of this is to consider cities after
science-completeness. Today, we flock to urban centers mostly dictated by career
ambition, opportunities and economic necessity. At some stage you may imagine
that, freed from such constraints, we'll be drawn from something else entirely:
the vibe, the scenes, the particular cultural textures that makes you experience
Rome in Granada, the intricacies of ordering that make your neighborhood bar
unique despite serving the same beer as everywhere else, that make a language
feel like an inseparable part of yourself rather than just a tool for
communication.

A possible corollary of this is that we may shift our measures of wealth away
from economic indicators such as GDP and towards measures of cultural output,
both in terms of quantity and quality[^2]. A nation that produces more and
better cultural artifacts could be interpreted as being able to afford to do so,
i.e. have less of the technical debt mentioned earlier, and thereby be
wealthier.

[^2]: <https://x.com/thelokasiffers/status/1924955102990803120>

## Conclusion

Zooming back in and returning to present-day, on a personal level I found this
framing to help further motivate what I dedicate my career to. Yes, getting to
work on machine learning in the pursuit of artificial general intelligence
already comes with a ton of motivation -- I get to work on the
['grande challenge' of our times](https://x.com/tensorqt/status/1839725869939470597),
the curiosity itch is more than scratched (these are interesting problems to
solve!), and it's also really cool in a sci-fi kinda way, which I like. But
beyond that, the framing gives me further answers to the questions of "ok but
why bother with this grand challenge in particular?" -- 1. Because it is likely
one of the highest leverage approaches to bridging that technical debt 2.
Because beyond that gap we get to enjoy a culture-maxxing world, a world which I
think will be more meaningful. Outside of work, the framing has guided me also
in what sort of hobbies I pursue, and what I do with my free time. Besides the
deeper meaning I get from the rationalization, in a science-complete world it
will be valuable to be able to contribute to culture, so may as well start now.

So, what does all this mean for what we should _actually do_ about culture
today? If we accept the thesis that, in the limit, culture is the only
non-redundant contribution left, then it becomes urgent to resist the flattening
forces of globalization and monoculture. The world does not need a single,
blandly universal set of stories, aesthetics, or rituals. It needs difference,
specificity, and texture. This is not an argument for static preservation or
nostalgia, but for active participation: **engage in culture, create it, curate
it, protect it.** Recognize that not all cultural output is automatically good
or meaningful—beauty is in the eye of the beholder, but only up to a point;
there are real questions of quality, depth, and significance that are worth
interrogating. Perhaps, in a science-complete world, the study and cultivation
of culture—understanding what makes it rich, vibrant, or beautiful—will itself
become a new kind of science, or at least the most important human endeavor
left. Until then, we might as well get good at it.

## Appendix

### Engineering

(what about engineering? tough to say. what i came to is. engineering is
artesanal, simplifying -- engineering is _how_ we use science to solve problems
-- there is a story, there is design, there are preferences (taste), this is
culture. not sure im convinced but maybe theres something there.)

### Anthropocentrism

(why does meaning necessarily need to be derived from things uniquely human?
idk)

### Is this just the Singularity?

(kinda? i feel like this is the end state of the singularity, which in my mind
is the moment a civilization (or the universe) gets the intelligence explosion
which would ultimately culminate in "solving" science.)

### Flora and Fauna

(This feels like part of the identity of a place, so feels like it should fall
under the culture grouping. Perhaps this is an indication that culture is the
wrong term.)
